Testing,
one, two, three, testing. It looks like it's
working.
History of College Station, Mr. J.O. White, July
11, 1983. Mr.
White, where were you born? Kyle Field. Kyle
Field? Kyle Field, A&M College. Why were you born
on Kyle Field? Because it was an experiment farm
and it had houses on it. Did your parents work for
the experiment farm? Were you born in the house? In
the house, yes. Were there any hospitals at that
time that you could have gone to? Midlife
brought me
I don't know who she was. Was that the normal way,
the kids? Well, yes. The poor people, yes. Myself
and Leroy Davis. He still lives. We were born.
In these houses that were on what is presently Kyle
Field? On Kyle Field, yes. OK. Where were your
parents from? Sunbury, this county here. They
were born in Brazos County? Yes, yes. Okay.
Were they associated with the cotton
plantations? No, my mother was a domestic. And my
father worked at the experiment, you know. What
did he do at the cotton experiment station? Well,
we would cultivate it, etc., The cotton was
planted behind the houses, is that right? All
around the houses. And he would go out and
cultivate the cotton? And did he and other men pick
it, or did they have some other kind of? It was an
experiment. It was an experiment farm. So they
were just trying out different things. Yes.
Different insects, et cetera, and all of that. How
long have your relatives lived in this area? Have
they lived here for a long time? Ever since I've
been launching, I have to remember. I'm 72. Were
maybe some of your relatives,
great-grandparents, were they slaves on
plantations that were around here? My
grandmother wasn't. She wasn't? No. What did your
grandmother do? She wasn't born in this country.
Where was she born? Calcutta, Indiana. Oh, she
was?
They would decorate their face? No, no, it's in my
nose and my cheekbones and things. It's not like
the average black person. That's Indian? Is that
right? That's what I was talking about. So she came
from India to Brazos County? Yes. I don't know
anything about it. My father was born there. Your
father was born in India? But your mother's family
had lived here. Did your mother ever talk about
your family extending back before the Civil War?
On her side? No, not really. But my grandmother,
she would tell me about Her side. She died in early
30s. She was in the school system over there. In
India?
And she would tell you about... Well, how did she
come to live in Texas? Well, if I make no mistake, I
believe she told me that
somebody from the States... told them that money
was growing on trees. And they were referring to
cotton. Did your grandmother know it, that they
were talking about cotton? No, no, no, no, no. And
so she came? Yes. And did she meet your grandfather
here? No. No? Oh, from India, I guess. Oh, I see. OK.
OK.
How many brothers and sisters do you have? Are you
the only one? I've got one half-sister. She lives
in Inwood, Long Island, New York, and I haven't
seen her since 1945 when I was discharged in New
York. Oh, I bet that's sad, not seeing your... I
talked with her. Do you? We talked with each other.
Oh, okay. Can you tell me what it was like to grow up?
Apparently you must have lived on... in this house
on Kyle Field. And can you tell me what it was like to
grow up on the A&M campus? Well, it was a great life.
It was a great life. I don't know anything about no
depression. Oh, really? Didn't have... Well, it
was a depression, but I didn't know anything about
it. I would go to the dining hall and eat. I'd go to
the hospital and eat. I mean, everything was
plentiful. See, in that day and time, the
Caucasian people, they didn't eat chicken wings,
chicken livers, chicken necks. They didn't? No.
At least the students didn't. And all of that would
be put in the garbage, you see. That's terrible.
And my mother's husband would confiscate that and
save it, and they would take it down to Navasota to
her father.
This was where they could survive during the
Depression.
So you would take food from the college and take it
to your folks, your grandparents. Grandparents.
OK. The house that you grew up in, at first, did it
have electricity? No. What did you use in place of
electricity? A kerosene lamp, an outhouse. You
had an outhouse. What about water? Well, we had
hydrants.
Did you have to go? There wasn't any running water
in the house? No. You had to go get it. Outside, yes.
Okay. And days, I don't know. and the largest tin
tub you could get. You would bathe in that? Yes,
that's what we would bathe in. What did you do? What
kind of chores did you do when you were growing up?
Well, I found out large enough to have more lawns,
play with Howard Hughes, Howard Hedge, George
Wren, Bug Mouser, Flop Coulson. These are all boys
growing up on the campus? White boys. White boys
growing? Bub Malzner.
T.O. Walton. When you say mow lawns, did you mow
lawns on the A&M campus? With a hand mower, not an
electric mower. Yeah, those are a lot more
difficult. Where did you go to school? Well, and
Brian. Oh, you went to the elementary school and
Brian? And high school. And high school there,
too? Used to have to ride a trolley. Some of the
neighbors you couldn't catch on with. Did the
other boys also go to school there, too? The other
black boys? Well, the black boys and the boys you
were mentioning just a minute ago? No, they was
white boys, the one I was mentioning. Right. They
went to consolidated school. Why didn't you go to
consolidated? A Negro and white wasn't attending
the same school. Was there a Negro school in Bryan
that you went to? Yes. I see. Oh, okay. There used to
be a Negro school down there by this church. The
church on the left. There was a Negro school there.
Elementary school. What church? Washington
Chapel. Oh, really? Right there. When was that,
before you went to school? When was that
established? Well, I can't say it was
established, but elementary school, that's
where I went. That's where you went when you were in
elementary school? Mm-hmm. Who sponsored that?
Was it the county? I imagine so. So right here where
Washington Chapel is, there was a- Just this side
of Washington Chapel. There was a black
elementary school. And who did it serve? Where did
the students come from? All over, all up in Boyce
Flat and all up here on the other side of it, on
Culpeper Plaza. There used to be a lot of black
houses over here. Black families all over on the
Wildland Road. They all went to that one-room
school. I see. And you were not allowed to go to the
school, the consolidated school that was started
on the A&M campus? No. Because you were black. So it
was segregated then. Oh yes, sure. Yes it was. Was
that something that, was it something that
bothered you then? It didn't bother me because I
was raised around whites all my life and really, I
really didn't consider myself a You know, I didn't
realize... There was a difference? Other than
some occasions. Well, it shouldn't be. That's the
way it should be. Because you take Preston Bolden,
Frank Bolden,
Dean Winkle's boys, and, uh...
Bob Malden.
A.C. Lewis, Billy Lewis, Frank Brown, Jr.
All of those people were Caucasians. I played with
them.
Charlie Harris, his father was head of the
laundry. Frank Brown, Jr., his daddy was head of
the electrical department, head electrician on
A&M College. Billy and A.C. Lewis, their father
was the head of the plumbing department on the
campus. And T.O. Wolin, his dad was president.
Keith Langford, his father was the first mayor A&M
College had.
And John Hubachi,
John Conyer, Edward Hodlicker.
Who are these people? People who lived in the
community? Yes, they were around. They were
humans, but they were still Caucasian. I went to
school. I didn't go to school with them. I played
with them all. Came up together. H.W. Holland, his
father was a foreman on the railroad track. Edward
Hodlicker's father owned the grocery store on
Welburn Road. Where was that located? On Welburn,
is it located where it is today? Do you know where
it's located today? You know where Fish Richard's
restaurant is? Oh, no. No. Look here. Going down,
just opposite the college, there's a cement plant
or something down there. Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Just
opposite of that. Used to be H-R-D-L-Y-C-K-A.
Okay.
Do you feel like that you got an adequate
education? Yes, I do. Were the teachers that you
had, were they Negro or did you have white
teachers? They were Negroes. They were? It was the
same? All black.
What did you do if somebody was sick? Where did you
go if someone in your family was sick? To Dr.
Morris. On the campus. Is that right? Mm. He'll
wait on you.
OK. OK.
All right. What did?
Was there any kind of a Negro
community? What did the Negro people do for living
around this area? All worked on A&M College. They
all did? They all worked on A&M? There's a lot of
them older than me that was born on A&M College. A
lot of them were born on A&M College? You see Sam
Pierce.
And others, I can't recall, offhand.
OK. Was there any kind of a group? Did you ever get
together to do activities together? We used to
play ball right back at Consolidated School when
it was on the campus. Baseball. Did you play
against other teams? Or just boys getting
together to play? Other teams. We played against
the wave, going on the campus. They knew all of us.
They'd come out down here and we'd play ball. And
how important was the church? Was there a church
that you attended, your family? The Washington
Chapel. Where the school was, near the school?
What denomination is that? Protestant. It's
Protestant? And then there was St. Matthew's.
It's still over there. St. Matthew's? And it's
Protestant? Oh, black. It is? Oh, it's over there?
It's still over there?
It's over... I don't know. It's over there. It's
still over there. Was that pretty important, too?
Did y'all attend church a lot? Oh, yes. My mother
was quite religious. She used to work for Mrs.
Thomas, Mrs. Bryson,
Mrs. Barrett, Mrs. Jackie Walker, she raised
Johnny Walker Knox Jr.
And the Mayfields. Apparently on campus there
were these houses. Did she work for people that
lived on campus? Yes.
Do you remember what it looked like, where the
houses were located on the campus? Oh, sure. I can
go in there and point out where each house used to
be. Really? Where is the approximate location?
Can you tell me the approximate location where
these houses were? Well, by me not being too
familiar with the campus now, all that where the
Stuluk Center is, houses was there. start at
Wilburn Road, come on up by the stadium, on around,
just everywhere. The
faculty and some Army personnel, Colonel George
F. Moore, used to stay opposite Guyon Hall.
Dr. Freps, Dr. J.J. Tobinhouse, A.B. Connor, A.
Mitchell, M. Mitchell. They stayed up at
Northgate. Were
there houses at Northgate on the campus still or
across? Yes, on the campus. Still on the campus? Do
you remember when these houses and the house that
you lived in, do you remember when they were moved
off campus or what happened to them? Well,
I remember but I don't recall the year. Because
when I left, after I came out of high school, Clark,
Coleson, and his brother Jim and old man Colson,
they had a triple A building down there, a long
cabin just below Kyle Field before you get off the
campus. They stayed down there. There was a lot of
trees around there.
The Colson lived just inside on the campus, just
outside on the campus. Mr. Fleming lived,
I recall his initial, Colonel Todd lived down
there, Mrs. Todd, Fletcher, Schultz, Littles,
Langfoot, Bryson, Lancaster, McNew,
These are people who lived off campus in the little
community? Down in? Right across from it? College
Park? Yes, I guess so. But do you remember when the
houses were moved off or why the houses that were on
campus? No, I wasn't here. You weren't here? I
wasn't here. When you were growing up, can you
describe what College Station looked like to me?
Well, it's a very pretty place. All those live oak
trees, I remember when a lot of them was plagued, or
was planted. And they had the gardeners going
around taking care of them. And Dr. Mostello, E.E.
McQuillan, and so many others. They stayed right
across from Guyon Hall.
And so many others. J.J. Tubman House. And I just
can't recall all of the names. Oh, no, you've given
me plenty. Dr.
T.O. Wallen Sr. was a very nice man.
He was all man. He was strict.
T.O. Jr. and myself I remember once
the Aggie was coming from, I believe, SMU or TCU by
train. They got in around 3 AM. And Teal and I got up
and rode his sister's bicycle, Lily Mae, and his
bicycle down to the station. And somebody told Dr.
Walden about it. And so we got what was coming to us.
And you got in trouble, too? Well, sure, I got in
trouble, too. Dr. Morris was one of the kindest
men. Miss Claygon, she was more mouth than
anything. Gold, had a heart of gold. I used to work
for Mr. Harry Boyer. Boyer. Yes, Harry Boyer.
Mm-hmm. Joe E. Davis, he's become the king.
Mm-hmm. And Sergeant King, Sergeant B.B. King,
Sergeant Daniel,
and so many others. Well, when you were growing up,
what did it look like on this part of the city at
Eastgate? What was this area like? It was
farmland. All this was farmland. And who owned it,
or who lived here? There
was a black family that lived up on that hill. His
name was Elmo Ross.
Down here where the light is, That was the vulvas.
They were for human people. They formed, and it's
plant cotton.
All along here, this... How would you spell vulva?
I believe
it's V-L... vulva. V-L-V-A, I believe. V-L-V-A?
V-A-L-V-A. Okay, okay. Vulva. So this area was
cotton farmland? Yes, yes. And this was just a
two-lane gravel road? Right. Okay. What was the
area at, I guess, Southgate like? You mean right
over here? Right over here. All those houses on the
left point? Uh-huh, uh-huh. Well, Frank Double
Boy on that, he had rent houses, shotgun rent
houses for blacks. He did? I used to live over
there. and a lot of others. About what year did he
have those?
30, 39, as far as I remember. Right over here. Right
over where all these nice homes are.
Going back toward the Kyle Field,
I came back here and a school had been built up
there. College doing that. Just
the other side of that, Mr. Bill Sparks and Hersha
Burgess, they developed that. Put in homes. Nice
homes up there. And Mr. Hensley and his brother,
they built some homes up there right beside the
highway. Mr. Sherrill.
Mr.
Burgess built a big house back there.
And I think Mr. Sparks built a house back there. I
think so, too. I think I remember reading that. At
Westgate, that was where the train station was. Is
that right? West... Right, right across from over
there. That's the train station. The creamery
used to be there.
Do you happen to remember the college zoo?
There was a zoo there in the 20s.
I thought that was interesting that they had a zoo.
I had read about it. in Dr. Detlof's book. That's
how I had heard about it. Well, I used to go there
fishing. They called them crappies. Now we call
them white putch. There was a pond? Yes. What about
at Northgate? Did you have the stores or anything
developed when you were growing up? Mr. Sparks and
Jeff Casey had a drugstore up there. Dr. Lipscomb
used to work for Mr. Casey and Mr. Spock. He built a
drugstore across the street. That was Harlech
Boot Shop. Luke and Charlie had a grocery store.
And the Boyds always had on that land up there.
Youngblood built a tailor shop. cleaning and
pressing shop.
And built a cleaning and pressing shop.
And up there. What was that, a store? Yes, . Men's
clothing. A.M. Wardrop. And
that's this church up there. I think the minister
was named Reverend Brown.
But there were very few men. Used to raise cotton
all out there. You know where the theater is?
Circle Drive, that one? I don't know. It's on
University Drive.
Back that way, that was the Boyettes. They had
comedy there. Oh, I know what you're talking
about. Campus Theater, right? That was all
Boyette land? Yes, Boyette. B-O-Y-E-T-T. I think
you mentioned earlier Boyette Flats, is that
right? That's Upper Borough where a whole lot of
apartments up there. That was... Going... North?
Going... Yes, north or west. Okay. There's
apartments now in that area? That's what I
understand. Is that, was that an area, Boyette
Flats, what was there? Cotton fields or? No.
Shotgunning out with blacks living in them. In
what years?
Well, this is as long as I can remember up until the
30s. Oh, really? Because I know a lot of kids were
born up there. Oh, really? So past Northgate area
and where the apartment complexes are now is an
area that was called Rear Flats. And now we're on
shotgun houses for black families. And these
black families worked on A&M campus. Right up
here. Roland Columbus, Albert Pierce, and that
group, another back group. Did they live there?
They owned that land. Were they cotton farmers?
No, no, worked on campus. Oh, oh, oh. Roland
Columbus was the second in command to the Lewis
plumbers. The plumbers on campus? Uh-huh.
Uh-huh, uh-huh. He knew more about the campus
plumbing on the campus than anybody. Lewis was his
name? No, no. Columbus. Roland Columbus. And he
lived like at University in Texas? No, no. Back
this way. This first street back here. Oh, wow.
He's got one daughter. She lived over there
somewhere on College Hills, I think. Somewhere
back there. Well, what I was interested in is Were
the black people that lived here, the Negro
community that developed, had they lived here for
a long time in Brazos County? As far as I know. Do you
think maybe they had lived here before the Civil
War? Probably so. They were treated civilized.
Well, I see along the Brazos River there were
cotton plantations, and I was wondering maybe if
somewhere... These newcomers came in here.
Newcomers? Newcomers. From where? off these
farms and plantations. Newcomers referring to?
They migrated in here, getting better paying
jobs. We had been here all our lives. Well
newcomers, black or white or both? Black. And they
were coming because of the university to work
there? Where were they coming from? Down the
bottom. Across the river, out at Rowan Chapel,
just everywhere. Okay, I was just curious on how
people started living here before A&M, I guess,
was built. Ever since I've been old enough to
remember, it's been blacks here and all across the
railroad track. The Henrys used to own the
property over there. They were black. The gays
owned the property over there. They were black.
down Wilburn Road, the Davises. They were black. I
didn't know. Maybe had they come here from Africa
or do you know? Just came from parts of America? Do
you remember the Blue Bonnet Motel? Yes, yes. It
had a blue top. It was a blue top and a blue bonnet. I
don't remember. I just saw a reference to it, but it
was here. It was right up here on the right. Yes, I
remember. And that's where people stayed who came
to... White. White people stayed? Yes, black.
Well, could you really... See, this is something
I'm not familiar with, segregation. Because, you
know, in the generation I grew up in, there was such
a push... LBJ presidency to make sure that
everybody was treated equal. But was it something
that was very distinct here, the difference
between black and white? Not too distinct on the
campus.
Educated people, white people, you have no
trouble. It's the poor white man that gave you
trouble. Were there poor white men living around
here that gave you trouble? I never had any
trouble. OK, or gave other? No, it wasn't too much
trouble we had. Everybody got along like brothers
and sisters. They'd know each other. And that was
just it. It wasn't any trouble. There was no
fighting that I can recall, or no arguments that I
can recall. amongst the races.
But basically, the trouble comes in when you have
the poor white class living with the black. There
was some poor whites lived on the campus then.
Don't get me wrong. All I want are professors and
things. And they would say some snotty things,
but that's life. Some of them say it now. That's
probably true. What was the transportation like?
You were talking about the trolley. You would take
the trolley to school and back each day? Oh yes, I
went by the nickel and dime. Where did you get on it
and where did it take you? I went by the hospital.
The old hospital? And it would take you? On 26th
Street and And you could walk to school from there?
Yes. Was your high school also segregated? Was it
all a black school? Yes. Okay.
Since you lived on campus, this is, you basically
ate dinner at On campus, I mean, did your parents
bring food to the home and cook it there? Well, my
mother was a domestic, and if she didn't bring it
from her job, I could go to the dining hall and eat. I
could go to the hospital and eat, because the
people knew me. And basically, she worked with
people who lived on campus. Is that right? Ms.
Bryson, Ms. Billson. Wankler, just all of those
people. When did you and your family move off
campus?
Late 20s, early 20s. Where were you going? We moved
over there in the Devil's Corner. Oh, okay. The
place that you were just talking about? And why
were you, why did y'all move? Was it, were the
people, was every, were everybody moving off
then? No, wasn't everybody? These houses were
just torn down.
Was your mother and father still working on campus
though? My mother, she was domestic. She had
remarried. She and my father, I don't even much
remember my mother and father being together. But
she was still working on campus. Yeah, she was
working. Jackie Walker, Howard Bryson, Mr.
Brayton,
Mayfield. Are you familiar with the Lincoln area,
Lincoln School area? No? Because there's a lot of
black people that live there today, and I was
curious as to, you know where Lincoln School is? I
don't know about that. It's going down Wellburn. I
really guess I can't explain it as to where it
really is. But do you know where Fairview Street
is? No. Oh, OK. I thought maybe you would. Did you
hear of a community called Spring Green? No. OK.
You may not have been in College Station at this
time, but do you remember when College Station was
incorporated into a city?
Not really, but I remember the first mail College
Station had. That was? My white daddy, Ernest
Langford. Why do you call him your white daddy?
Because I was just like a child of his, I told you.
It's because of me getting a college education.
How did he do that? Well, because everybody on
campus knew me, and Mr. Tony Harrington, Mr.
Fleming, Mr. Charlie Crawford, and numerous
others contributed so much money.
And
after I got my education, I sent the money back from
San Francisco, and he distributed to each person
the amount that they contributed. Where did you go
to school? A&M or somewhere else? No, no. I went to
school in California. You went to school in
California? No, college. What degree did you get?
Well, I got a little old piece of paper. I measured
in business administration. But Mr. Lankford was
responsible for providing... He was
responsible. He was responsible. For providing
the money, and he got it from these group of men? I
went around and talked to each individual myself
and told them what I wanted, asked if they would
help, and they did. And once you got your job, you
sent back the money to these people? Yeah, I sent it
to my white dad, and he gave me that money back.
That's wonderful. I was able to talk to Mr.
Crawford, too. Charlie Crawford? Mm-hmm. He's a
fine man. He has a mechanical engine. That's
right. That's right. He's a very nice person. And
J.T.L. Mackney. I knew him personally. His son is a
doctor. I haven't seen Buddy since he was a little
boy. But his sister, he's got a sister who lives in
Oakland, California. Her name is Elizabeth. I've
been to her home. Her husband and I work with the
same company, Standard Oil Company of
California. His name is Little. I went to see her
and I've been to her home and seen her kids. Is that
right? That's wonderful. Anyway, I guess, were
you here when College Station became a town? Do you
remember that?
Well, yes, I was. I mean, it wasn't just, you know,
just being a boy at a store up there. That was years
and years ago. Where was Boyett's store? Right
along in there where, I don't know what's there
now. At Northgate? Up there. Yes, at Northgate by
the post office, sort of down to the right. He had a
store? Boyett's store. Do you remember anything,
any rivalry between Brian and College Station?
What are you referring to, Riley? Well, Bryan, I
believe, wanted to incorporate College Station
into their own town. He did. And College Station
wanted to be its own town. They wanted to be College
Station. Do you know why? Why they'd rather not?
Well, to my idea, I think College Station is more
sophisticated than the peoples in Bryan. They
know they've got to educate most educated peoples
here than they have in Bryan. And so they wanted to
be counted as one instead of two, you know. College
Station, College Station, Brian's one. Because
if it wasn't College Station, there wouldn't have
been any Brian. Brian didn't have no industry.
Nothing but, well, farmers bringing their cotton
in there. And College Station, look what they was
doing. That's right. College helped Brian. Is
that right? Supported Brian. Because you see, at
the laundry, maybe 100 black women were working
there and some white, but they was getting $45 a
month, five days a week. The janitors, those
fellows there, they was getting $45 a month. I see.
So the college was supporting these people and
providing them an occupation? They were living in
Brown. They were? A lot of these people? All of
them. All of them. This man here wasn't, and this
one wasn't. But all the rest of these people were
living in Weldon or Bryant.
So the college did support them then? Right. And
I've seen the time. During the summer when school
was out, they'd have those big vats. You know what a
bed bug is?
It was just that bad. They'd have to dip all of those
bugs in that creosote or whatever it was to kill
those bed bugs. Changes. What are you talking
about? The cotton? No. The springs. You see, the
books have springs on them. Oh, you're talking
about the beds that are on campus in the dorms? Yes.
Oh, I see. They would have to, during the
summertime, put them in? Oh, yeah. You turn the
light on, they line up like soldiers. That would
have been pretty. You're saying that the beds in
the dorms were like that? That's the old A&M
College. And so you would treat him each summer, is
that right? Yes, we do. Okay, just a second.